{\rtf1\ansi\uc1\deff0\deflang1024
{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}
{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Arial;}
{\f2\fnil\fcharset0 Arial;}
{\f3\fnil\fcharset0 Courier New;}
{\f4\fnil\fcharset0 Zapf Chancery;}
{\f5\fnil\fcharset0 STIXGeneral;}
{\f6\fnil\fcharset0 MS Gothic;}
}
{\colortbl;
\red0\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;
}
{\stylesheet
{\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22 \snext0 Normal;}
{\cs10 \additive\ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\s1\qc\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40 \sbasedon0\snext0 Part;}
{\s2\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}
{\s3\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 2;}
{\s4\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 3;}
{\s5\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 4;}
{\s6\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 5;}
{\s7\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 6;}
{\s8\qr\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext8 rightpar;}
{\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext9 centerpar;}
{\s10\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext10 leftpar;}
{\s11\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equation;}
{\s12\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationNum;}
{\s13\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationAlign;}
{\s14\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationAlignNum;}
{\s15\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationArray;}
{\s16\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationArrayNum;}
{\s17\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 theorem;}
{\s18\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 bitmapCenter;}
{\s20\qc\sb240\sa240\b\f0\fs36 \sbasedon0\snext21 Title;}
{\s21\qc\sa120\f0\fs22 \sbasedon0\snext0 author;}
{\s22\ql\tqc\tx4536\tqr\tx9072\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext22 footer;}
{\s23\ql\tqc\tx4536\tqr\tx9072\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext23 header;}
{\s30\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 caption;}
{\s31\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 Figure;}
{\s32\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext32 Table;}
{\s33\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext33 Tabular;}
{\s34\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext34 Tabbing;}
{\s35\qj\li1024\ri1024\fi340\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext35 Quote;}
{\s38\ql\widctlpar\f3\fs22 \snext38 verbatim;}
{\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext46 List;}
{\s47\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext47 List 1;}
{\s50\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 latex picture;}
{\s51\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 subfigure;}
{\s61\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext62 bibheading;}
{\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext62 bibitem;}
{\s64\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext64 endnotes;}
{\s65\ql\fi-113\li397\lin397\f0\fs22 \sbasedon0\snext65 footnote text;}
{\s66\qj\fi-170\li454\lin454\f0\fs22 \sbasedon0\snext66 endnote text;}
{\cs62\super \additive\sbasedon10 footnote reference;}
{\cs63\super \additive\sbasedon10 endnote reference;}
{\s67\ql\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs22 \sbasedon0\snext67 acronym;}
{\s70\qc\sa120\b\f0\fs22 \sbasedon0\snext71 abstract title;}
{\s71\qj\li1024\ri1024\fi340\widctlpar\f0\fs22 \sbasedon0\snext0 abstract;}
{\s80\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 contents_heading;}
{\s81\ql\li425\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb240\sa60\keepn\f0\fs22\b \sbasedon0\snext82 toc 1;}
{\s82\ql\li512\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs22 \sbasedon0\snext83 toc 2;}
{\s83\ql\li1024\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs22 \sbasedon0\snext84 toc 3;}
{\s84\ql\li1536\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs22 \sbasedon0\snext85 toc 4;}
{\s85\ql\li2048\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs22 \sbasedon0\snext86 toc 5;}
{\s86\ql\li2560\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs22 \sbasedon0\snext86 toc 6;}
}
{\info
{\title Original file was limitingcuesforNPHwbib.tex}
{\doccomm Created using latex2rtf 2.3.18 r1267 (released May 30, 2020) on Thu May 12 12:19:19 2022
}
}
{\footer\pard\plain\f0\fs22\qc\chpgn\par}
\paperw12280\paperh15900\margl1589\margr1589\margt1445\margb1445\pgnstart0\widowctrl\qj\ftnbj\f0\aftnnar
{{\pard\plain\s8\qr\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \fs20 Version dated: \chdate  \par
}\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 \fs20 RH: Interactive cues & phenology\par
{\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \sb360 \fi0 \fs20 {\fs31 {\i0\scaps0\b Integrating experiments to predict interactive cue effects on spring phenology with warming}}\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \fs20 \par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 \fs20 {\fs22 \i0\b0\scaps  E. M. Wolkovich{{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ \\s\\up5({\fs18 1\\,2\\,3})}}{\fldrslt }}
}, C. J. Chamberlain{{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ \\s\\up5({\fs18 2\\,3})}}{\fldrslt }}
}, D. M. Buonaiuto{{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ \\s\\up5({\fs18 2\\,3})}}{\fldrslt }}
}, \par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \scaps A. K. Ettinger{{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ \\s\\up5({\fs18 4})}}{\fldrslt }}
} & I. Morales-Castilla{{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ \\s\\up5({\fs18 5})}}{\fldrslt }}
}}\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \fs20 {\fs20 \scaps0\b0\i  {{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ \\s\\up5({\fs16 1})}}{\fldrslt }}
} Forest & Conservation Sciences, Faculty of Forestry, University of British Columbia, 2424 Main Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \fs20 \scaps0\i {{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ \\s\\up5({\fs16 2})}}{\fldrslt }}
} Arnold Arboretum of Harvard University, 1300 Centre Street, Boston, Massachusetts, 02131, USA\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \fs20 \scaps0\i {{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ \\s\\up5({\fs16 3})}}{\fldrslt }}
} Organismic & Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 26 Oxford Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02138, USA\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \fs20 \scaps0\i {{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ \\s\\up5({\fs16 4})}}{\fldrslt }}
} The Nature Conservancy, 74 Wall Street, Seattle, Washington, 98121, USA\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \fs20 \scaps0\i {{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ \\s\\up5({\fs16 5})}}{\fldrslt }}
} Global Change Ecology and Evolution Group, Department of Life Sciences, University of Alcal\'e0, Alcal\'e0 de Henares 28805, Spain} \par
}\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi0 \fs20 {\i0\scaps0\b Corresponding author:} Lizzie, see {{\field{\*\fldinst{ EQ \\s\\up5({\fs16 3})}}{\fldrslt }}
} above ; E-mail: e.wolkovich@ubc.ca\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \fs20 Additional information: Wolkovich (0000-0001-7653-893X); Chamberlain (0000-0001-5495-3219); Buonaiuto (0000-0003-4022-2591, Twitter: @dbuona2); Ettinger (0000-0002-6228-6732, Twitter: @AileneKane); Morales-Castilla (0000-0002-8570-9312, Twitter: GloCEE@EcoEvo)\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \fs20  {\i Summary:} Climate change has advanced plant phenology globally 4-6 days per {\'b0}C on average. Such shifts are some of the most reported and predictable biological impacts of rising temperatures. Yet as climate change has marched on, phenological shifts have appeared muted over recent decades\emdash failing to match simple predictions of an advancing spring with continued warming. The main hypothesis for these changing trends is that interactions between spring phenological cues\emdash long-documented in lab environments\emdash are playing a greater role in natural environments due to climate change. Here we argue that accurately linking shifts observed in long-term data to underlying phenological cues is slowed by biases in observational studies and limited integration of insights from lab studies. We synthesize seven decades of lab experiments to quantify how phenological cue-space has been studied and how treatments compare to shifts caused by climate change. Most studies focus on one cue, limiting our ability to make accurate predictions, but some well-studied forest species offer opportunities to advance forecasting. We outline how greater integration of controlled environment studies with long-term data could drive a new generation of lab experiments, built on physiological insights, that would transform our fundamental understanding of phenology and improve predictions. \par
\column
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \fs20 {\i Keywords:} climate change, spring warming, chilling, forcing, photoperiod, non-linear responses, leafout, budburst\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \fs20  \par
\column
\pard\plain\s3\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 1  Main text\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Shifts in spring plant phenology are one of the most reported and predictable changes with climate change. Decades of research have documented advancing budburst, leafout and flowering with climate change ({Delpierre {\i et\~al.}}, 2009; {Yu {\i et\~al.}}, 2010; {Ellwood {\i et\~al.}}, 2013; {Jochner {\i et\~al.}}, 2013; {Hereford {\i et\~al.}}, 2017), especially in temperate systems where long-term records highlight how humans have altered the timing of spring ({Schwartz}, 1997; {Menzel {\i et\~al.}}, 2006). Recently, however, these advances have appeared to slow ({Fu {\i et\~al.}}, 2015) or even reverse in some regions ({Yu {\i et\~al.}}, 2010)\emdash failing to match simple predictions of an advancing spring with continued warming ({Ellwood {\i et\~al.}}, 2013). The main hypothesis for this failure is that spring warming\emdash which most observational studies focus on\emdash is no longer the only environmental cue that matters to predicting responses to warming ({Chuine {\i et\~al.}}, 2016; {Gauzere {\i et\~al.}}, 2019).\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Despite the strong focus on spring temperatures, increasing evidence in climate change studies suggests a more complicated physiology (e.g., {Zohner {\i et\~al.}}, 2016; {Gauzere {\i et\~al.}}, 2019; {Ettinger {\i et\~al.}}, 2020). For decades, studies of agricultural and model species have found that three major cues underlie spring phenology ({Maurya & Bhalerao}, 2017; {Satake {\i et\~al.}}, 2022): chilling (cool temperatures, generally occurring in the fall and winter), forcing (warm temperatures, generally occurring in the late winter and early spring), and photoperiod (daylength). \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Together, chilling, forcing and photoperiod may produce non-linear responses. Predicting these non-linearities is a common goal in plant phenology research today ({G{\'fc}sewell {\i et\~al.}}, 2017; {Chen {\i et\~al.}}, 2019), but has been slowed by data gaps and the complexity of spring phenological cues. Non-linear responses can generally occur through two alternative pathways. First, while each cue alone may yield linear responses in the mid-range of cue levels, extremely high or low levels can produce threshold responses ({Heide}, 1993; {Partanen {\i et\~al.}}, 1998; {Singh {\i et\~al.}}, 2017; {Rinne {\i et\~al.}}, 2018). Such extreme cue levels are uncommon in natural environmental regimes and thus unlikely to explain recent observations of shifts. \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Most hypotheses for the observed decline instead invoke the interaction between cues to produce non-linear responses to warming. Yet estimating the effect of interactions from observational data, where cues themselves often covary, may produce spurious results ({Ettinger {\i et\~al.}}, 2020). In contrast, controlled environment (e.g., growth chamber) studies are designed to understand and estimate multiple cues, and can tease out their interactive effects. Such studies have been critical both in our understanding of interactions from a more simple statistical perspective\emdash where we estimate how the effect of one cue depends on another cue\emdash and from a deeper understanding of the developmental pathways that produce observed interactions. \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Here we argue that controlled environment studies to estimate cue interactions are critical to robust forecasts of phenological shifts with climate change. Such studies have been conducted for over 70 years, but they have rarely been reviewed and are often poorly integrated into the current phenological literature on climate change (e.g., {Fu {\i et\~al.}}, 2015; {Richardson {\i et\~al.}}, 2018). To address this gap, we synthesize these studies (Fig. {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMfig_datamap \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{?}}}) to quantify how much of the cue-space (i.e., the possible range of each cue and interactions across cues) has been studied and how treatments (i.e., levels of cues) compare to shifts in cues caused by climate change. Based on this, we suggest a path forward where advances in physiology, greater integration of controlled environment studies into forecasting, and population-to-species modeling can yield more robust predictions.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Given our aim to improve understanding of current trends and forecasts we focus on early vegetative phases (budburst and leafout), which are critical to plant growth and carbon storage, have shifted the most with climate change ({Cleland {\i et\~al.}}, 2007), and have been studied extensively in experiments (see Supporting Information Methods S1). Our review concentrates on woody species phenology, where most research on budburst and leafout has occurred. Most of our conclusions and suggested approaches, however, could be adapted to non-woody species and other phenophases with similar underlying interactive cues. \par
\pard\plain\s4\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi0 1.1  Why observational studies are not enough to robustly estimate cues\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 The first step towards robust phenological predictions is accurate measurements of chilling, forcing and photoperiod cues. Recently, efforts have focused on estimating these cues from long-term observational data (e.g., {Luedeling {\i et\~al.}}, 2013). Yet observational studies may struggle to accurately estimate any of the three major cues due to two types of statistical issues. First, in most observational data these cues are correlated: forcing increases alongside longer photoperiods ({Elmendorf & Ettinger}, 2020), and changes to chilling and photoperiod cues with warming predict the same response\emdash later spring phenology (but see Notes S1, \lquote The chilling enigma of over-winter temperatures\rquote  in Supporting Information for how chilling may lead to advances). Approaches that attempt to disentangle some of these correlations, such as leveraging trends across elevation or latitude, may run afoul of other correlations ( {Tansey {\i et\~al.}}, 2017). Second, most observational studies focus on linear models of each cue, often without estimating interactions between cues ({Visser & Holleman}, 2001; {Polgar {\i et\~al.}}, 2014). Even when interactions are invoked to explain declining responses to warming they are often not estimated statistically (e.g., {Fu {\i et\~al.}}, 2015).\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 In contrast to observational studies, controlled environment studies can manipulate each cue independently. By experimentally decoupling cues, they can tease out interactions between them allowing both statistical estimates of interactions, and insights into the developmental pathways that create them. Perhaps unsurprisingly then, most of our fundamental understanding of these cues comes from controlled environment studies.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Controlled environment studies have shown that chilling, forcing and photoperiod cues together determine the transition from dormancy to growth (usually first observed as budburst) each year for most temperate woody species ({van\~der Schoot {\i et\~al.}}, 2014; {Chuine & Regniere}, 2017; {Singh {\i et\~al.}}, 2017; {Chang {\i et\~al.}}, 2021). Chilling and forcing cues are generally understood to be accumulation processes, where plants integrate chilling and forcing experienced over time to meet a threshold value at which they can budburst, leafout or flower ({Chuine & Regniere}, 2017). In contrast, photoperiod is generally not considered an integral cue, but one evaluated daily. In practice, these two types of processes are often abstracted into the effects of average experienced values (mean temperature or daylength), generally over some temporal window in long-term data (e.g., {Wolkovich {\i et\~al.}}, 2012; {Fu {\i et\~al.}}, 2015), or by holding temperatures and light regimes more constant in experiments (e.g., {Worrall & Mergen}, 1967; {Heide}, 1993; {Skuterud & Dietrichson}, 1994). \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Combined with molecular approaches controlled environment studies have led to our current models of the pathways that control phenological events, and create interactions. The most well developed of these, the flowering time pathway for {\i Arabidopsis thaliana} (reviewed in {Satake {\i et\~al.}}, 2022), links closely to chilling, photoperiod and forcing: flowering time is mediated by cool temperatures\emdash through a vernalization pathway, daylength\emdash through circadian clock control, and together these pathways limit or promote development driven by warm temperatures. Similar multi-controlled pathways appear across other species and events ({Maurya & Bhalerao}, 2017; {Satake {\i et\~al.}}, 2022), including in peach flowering and {\i Populus} budbreak ({Azeez {\i et\~al.}}, 2021). Across species, these pathways almost always have far greater complexity than generally considered in observational studies of spring events. Molecular studies show that plants may monitor temperatures\emdash especially cool temperatures\emdash over long time periods, while also responding to short-term fluctuations, and new work on budbreak suggests epigenetic control, with multiple regulatory layers ({Azeez {\i et\~al.}}, 2021).\par
\pard\plain\s4\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi0 1.2  How climate change impacts cues\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Climate change is likely altering each of the three major cues. Long term data suggests that warming has already translated into shifts in forcing and chilling ({Fu {\i et\~al.}}, 2015; {Piao {\i et\~al.}}, 2017), but such estimates are complicated by our limited understanding of chilling (see Fig. {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMfig_chilling \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{?}}} and \lquote The chilling enigma of over-winter temperatures\rquote  in Supporting Information). Additionally, the relevant photoperiod a plant experiences during important physiological transitions (e.g., when dormancy ends) may change dramatically with warming ({Ettinger {\i et\~al.}}, 2021). \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Researchers hypothesize that these shifts\emdash in forcing, chilling and photoperiod experienced near the time of an event\emdash produce non-linearities in plant responses to warming. While a growing number of observational studies have attempted to document non-linear shifts in phenology due to interactive cues ({Fu {\i et\~al.}}, 2015; {Gauzere {\i et\~al.}}, 2019), understanding exactly when cues cause non-linearities may be more complicated than often presented (Fig. {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMfig_intxncues \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{1}}}), and almost always relies on knowledge gained from controlled environment studies (e.g., {Fu {\i et\~al.}}, 2015; {Richardson {\i et\~al.}}, 2018; {Gauzere {\i et\~al.}}, 2019).\par
\pard\plain\s4\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi0 1.3  Interactions alone are unlikely to produce non-linearities with warming\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Interactions are well-documented in controlled environment studies, and many may be explained via molecular pathways where chilling and photoperiod modify a developmental rate driven by forcing ({Chew {\i et\~al.}}, 2012). Supporting this, multiple studies now show that the threshold of forcing needed for budburst depends on the sum of chilling over the fall and winter and also the photoperiod experienced in the spring (e.g., {Zohner & Renner}, 2014; {Flynn & Wolkovich}, 2018). Higher forcing is generally needed given lower chilling (Fig. {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMfig_gddbyutah \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{2}}}) and shorter photoperiods ({Basler & K{\'f6}rner}, 2014; {Fu {\i et\~al.}}, 2019). Statistically, this yields a sub-additive interaction of forcing x chilling and forcing x photoperiod, where high values of both cues together produce a more muted response than would be expected from examining either cue alone.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 These interactions may produce a smaller response, but they do not necessarily produce non-linearities (Fig. {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMfig_intxncues \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{1}}}). Instead most hypotheses for non-linear responses tacitly require both the interaction of cues and covarying shifts in cues with warming to produce non-linearities. For example, if some species have a critical photoperiod for budburst and warming leads to forcing cues being met before the critical threshold\emdash effectively shifting both the forcing and photoperiod cues\emdash then we would expect incomplete or highly delayed budburst ({Singh {\i et\~al.}}, 2017; {Rinne {\i et\~al.}}, 2018). Alternatively, the threshold could be crossed in the opposite direction: in this case, pre-climate change conditions would cause budburst to occur at the extreme values of some cues, but warming could push budburst into values where responses are more linear. This is the mechanism often suggested for declining responses to warming in some temperate trees ({Fu {\i et\~al.}}, 2015; {Piao {\i et\~al.}}, 2017; {Gauzere {\i et\~al.}}, 2019), specifically that plants previously accumulated sufficient chilling such that forcing was the dominant cue\emdash whereas warming has now reduced chilling such that more forcing is needed for budburst (producing an overall muted effect when estimated as change in days per {\'b0}C, see {Fu {\i et\~al.}}, 2015, for one example). As this example highlights, however, changes in a single cue are unlikely to occur without additional effects on other cues\emdash complicating how well we can understand them in long-term data without robust understanding of the exact cue requirements from other methods.\par
\pard\plain\s4\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi0 1.4  Forecasting non-linear responses: Do we have the necessary data?\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Controlled environment studies can help predict non-linear responses by allowing researchers to examine the effects of one cue with the others held constant, and examine interactive effects\emdash given the appropriate study design. Such experiments may be especially useful for forecasting if they contain enough variation in treatments to capture precisely where non-linearities occur, and are designed across a range of levels relevant to current versus future conditions ({Shen {\i et\~al.}}, 2015). Indeed, one of the major advantages of experiments is that they allow treatments outside of the historical range of a species\rquote  (or region\rquote s) climate\emdash an option observational data cannot provide. \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 To understand how valuable currently available data may be to forecasting, we reviewed controlled environment studies over the last seven decades, quantifying the range of treatments and how they compare to current and future conditions. These studies were rarely conducted for climate change research, and most often done for reasons of fundamental or applied science (e.g., horticulture or forestry). Yet they are some of the best available data for how plants respond to the environment and thus a critical resource for climate change research today.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\i How studies and their experimental treatments vary globally}\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Controlled environment studies have been conducted with 226 woody species across the globe, with the majority of papers reporting research occurring in Europe (54 of 84 papers; and 93 of 136 studies across papers; a study is a unique experiment within a paper), followed by North America (22 papers and 32 studies, Fig. {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMfig_datamap \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{?}}}, Table {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMtab_ref \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{?}}}). Most studies manipulate one cue though studies of two or three cues have occurred in almost every decade (Fig. {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMfig_ts \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{?}}}). Across study designs, chilling was the most commonly studied cue (69% of 117 studies that manipulated at least one cue; with roughly half of these studies\emdash 47%\emdash using outdoor chilling through multiple field sampling dates), followed by forcing and photoperiod (43% and 40%, respectively). \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Studies have covered only a small portion of cue-space, especially for experimentally applied chilling (Fig. {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMfig_heatmaps \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{3}}}), with certain levels of cues much more common than others. This suggests we have greater inference at certain cue levels (e.g., 12 hour photoperiods and 20{\'b0}C forcing), but also more limited understanding beyond them, which could limit forecasting. The levels of cues also varied across latitude with a general trend toward examining more extreme values at higher latitudes (Fig. {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMfig_lat \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{?}}}, Notes S2 in Supporting Information). This trend appears related to latitudinal clines in the environment\emdash higher latitudes experience colder temperatures and longer photoperiods, and see similar shifts in their controlled environment study designs. But this trend also introduces a bias in results, as any comparisons of studies from lower and higher latitudes are also comparing a different range of cues (see \lquote Trends in experimental treatments over cue levels and space\rquote  in Supporting Information). \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\i How studies manipulate cues}\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Robust statistical tests for interactions come from experimental designs that include most or all combinations of all levels of cues studied (factorial design). Of the studies manipulating at least one cue, 37% (43 studies) additionally manipulated another cue in a factorial design, with studies almost evenly split across all possible two-way interactions. Studies examining three cues directly were rare: we identified only three studies examining all three cues at once. Two of these were on {\i Picea abies} ({Worrall & Mergen}, 1967; {S{\'f8}gaard {\i et\~al.}}, 2008), and the other on {\i Betula pendula} ({Skuterud & Dietrichson}, 1994). A slightly larger set of studies (5 studies from 4 papers) examined three cues indirectly\emdash manipulating photoperiod and forcing in controlled environments but equating chilling with sequential removal of tissue from the field\emdash for 11 species ({Schnabel & Wample}, 1987; {Heide}, 1993; {Partanen {\i et\~al.}}, 1998; {Basler & K{\'f6}rner}, 2014). \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\i Do we have enough data to estimate interactions?}\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 The small number of studies examining multiple cues hinders forecasting by limiting our understanding of how\emdash when combined\emdash cues will determine future budburst with continued warming. Because the cues are all known to be interactive, estimates of any one cue are influenced by the level of each other cue. But, unfortunately, current studies often do not report the levels of each cue (see \lquote NA\rquote  in Fig. {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMfig_heatmaps \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{3}}}), and many studies use field conditions to apply treatments (Fig. {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMfig_heatmaps \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{3}}}, and \lquote Paths forward\rquote  below).\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Of the 136 studies we reviewed, only 72 reported enough information to estimate forcing, chilling and photoperiod treatments ({Ettinger {\i et\~al.}}, 2020). This combined with the uneven sampling of cue-space (Fig. {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMfig_heatmaps \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{3}}}) makes it impossible to estimate the effect of interactions between cues with current data ({Ettinger {\i et\~al.}}, 2020). While a few studies estimated interaction terms (e.g., {Zohner & Renner}, 2014), most studies did not, likely because of the increased effort in study design. In addition to needing enough controlled environments to apply a full-factorial design, the statistical power needed to robustly estimate an interaction is much greater than a simple main effect (such as the effect of forcing or photoperiod alone)\emdash requiring a 16X greater sample size ({Gelman {\i et\~al.}}, 2020).\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\i How relevant are treatments to current and future conditions?}\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 The utility of controlled environment studies to forecasting also depends on how relevant treatments are to current and future conditions. Estimating such relevance is difficult as it depends on a species\rquote  geographical range and projections considered. However, a simple analysis of two well studied species, {\i Fagus sylvatica} and {\i Betula pendula}, suggests experiments have generally bracketed the range of projected temperatures (Fig. {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMfig_pep \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{4}}}), though there is a limited number of studies that directly manipulate chilling temperature (Fig. {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMfig_heatmaps \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{3}}}). Indeed, we found no studies with multiple chill temperatures for {\i Fagus sylvatica}, even though it is one of the most well-studied species (Fig. {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMfig_pep \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{4}}}C). \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Experimental treatments were generally larger than expected shifts due to climate change. This is not surprising given that certain forcing and photoperiod treatments were extremely common across studies (see above). It also makes sense from an experimental-statistical perspective: if the goal of an experiment is to identify if a cue is present then larger treatment differences should yield larger effect sizes and higher statistical power. Such large shifts, however, may be risky to extrapolate from when predicting effects of warming. \par
\pard\plain\s4\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi0 1.5  Paths forward\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 We argue that controlled environment experiments will be critical for accurate predictions of spring phenology given future warming. How accurate such predictions are will depend on the design of future experiments, breakthroughs in our physiological understanding of the major cues, and how well these two areas can be integrated with long-term data to improve models. \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\i Improving controlled environment studies}\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 We expect the most useful future experiments for forecasting will be designed to identify threshold effects, optimal temperatures/photoperiods, and non-linearities from interactive cues ({Caffarra {\i et\~al.}}, 2011). Identifying threshold effects and optimal temperatures or photoperiods generally translates into response function designs, which require many different levels of a single cue\emdash making such experiments difficult to cross with other cues. Yet, where a threshold or optimum occurs is likely dependent on the level of other cues ({Stearns & Olson}, 1958; {Flynn & Wolkovich}, 2018), making studies of interactive cues critical for robust forecasting. Ideally, studies testing for non-linearities due to interactive cues would be fully-crossed (i.e., every combination of levels is present in treatments), resulting in a robust response surface design. Such designs, however, can quickly require a large number of controlled environments. Researchers may be able to reduce such numbers by a modified response surface design that aims to characterize the response function of one focal cue across several relevant levels of the other cue. \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Controlled environment studies may also be more readily applied to forecasting by exploring more realistic conditions. While identifying thresholds, optima and non-linearities may involve considering informative extremes in levels of cues, most changes in cues due to climate change are and will be on a (relatively) smaller scale than experiments currently study (Fig. {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMfig_pep \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{4}}}). While species distribution models generally assume species will remain in the same climatic conditions ({Elith & Leathwick}, 2009), most evidence suggests species will lag in their spatial responses, meaning shifts in cues in the current range may be important to the fate of trailing edge populations ({Bertrand {\i et\~al.}}, 2011; {Lenoir & Svenning}, 2015). Thus, researchers should design experiments that include values of cues within the current and projected future species\rquote  range, rather than focusing on extreme comparisons only (e.g., 12 versus 24 hour photoperiods). In particular, our findings suggest forcing treatments (e.g., 20 and 25{\'b0}C) are often much higher than the average temperatures that study species experience near budburst ({Fu {\i et\~al.}}, 2015; {G{\'fc}sewell {\i et\~al.}}, 2017), and studies rarely consider multiple chilling temperatures. \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\i Incorporating our understanding of physiology into forecasts of phenology}\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Even with all the suggested above improvements, controlled environment studies will still be fundamentally limited in their utility for prediction without a deeper understanding of how major phenological cues act physiologically ({Bahuguna & Jagadish}, 2015). This problem is most acute in our understanding of dormancy, which divides chilling and forcing ({Chang {\i et\~al.}}, 2021). Researchers may use the terms \lquote chilling\rquote  and \lquote forcing\rquote  for their treatments, but they rarely have physiological evidence that these are the actual conditions plants experience ( {Chuine {\i et\~al.}}, 2016). \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Chilling is generally defined as accumulated cool temperatures in the first phase of dormancy (endodormancy), after which plants enter ecodormancy, when accumulated forcing leads to budburst ({Chuine {\i et\~al.}}, 2016). Measuring endodormancy and its transition into ecodormancy is notoriously difficult (e.g., {Junttila & H{\'e4}nninen}, 2012). In practice, most phenology studies use the terms \lquote chilling\rquote  and \lquote forcing\rquote  to mean \lquote cool temperatures\rquote  (either in the fall and winter or applied in experimental conditions) and \lquote warm temperatures\rquote  (either in the spring or applied after sufficient chilling) and generally hope they correspond to endo- and eco-dormancy\emdash without any evidence of this hoped-for correspondence ({Ettinger {\i et\~al.}}, 2020). Some studies use the sequential transfer of cuttings to warm conditions to estimate the transition from endo- to eco-dormancy, with rapid and full budburst (e.g., {>}90% of buds on a cutting) generally meaning a plant is ecodormant (e.g., {Junttila & H{\'e4}nninen}, 2012), but, given that this is labor- and space-intensive, few studies include this method. \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Physiologists have long recognized this issue and recent breakthroughs provide new insights into what causes dormancy at the cellular level ({van\~der Schoot {\i et\~al.}}, 2014). Our understanding of the molecular pathways, however, for dormancy and dormancy-break is very poor (especially when compared to our understanding of flowering time pathways, {Azeez {\i et\~al.}}, 2021), with most recent breakthroughs focused far downstream of the signal and receptor pathways. Thus far, research has been on a very limited number of species ({Singh {\i et\~al.}}, 2017; {Rinne {\i et\~al.}}, 2018), making extrapolation to other species difficult. \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Our inchoate understanding of endo- and eocdormancy pathways is likely the greatest current impediment to improved models of spring phenology. Without markers or other methods to clearly identify the start or end of chilling\emdash or whether there even is a clear start or end (as opposed to potential parallel models of chilling and forcing, {Harrington & Gould}, 2015)\emdash experiments will continue to operate with a set of latent chilling and forcing treatments (i.e. the underlying values of chilling and forcing that the plants actually experience) some distance from the \lquote chilling\rquote  and \lquote forcing\rquote  treatments researchers discuss in their papers. In such a murky experimental world, we may be unlikely to see rapid advances from new experiments. \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 An improved understanding of endodormancy release, however, could revolutionize models of chilling, and in turn, estimates of forcing. Future estimates could more accurately define chilling and forcing using only temperatures during endo- and eco-dormancy (respectively), assuming tractable tests of endo- and eco-dormancy and the uptake of such tests in controlled environment studies. With these experiments in hand, researchers could quickly build improved models of chilling, and forcing and\emdash for the first time\emdash provide accurate estimates of how chilling has and will shift with climate change.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\i Improving integration of controlled environment and physiological studies with long-term data}\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Predicting phenological responses today is done at different scales by different groups of researchers to answer what appear to be vastly different questions. Yet the goal of forecasting phenology in the new environmental regimes of climate change have united these fields in many ways. Researchers at the macro-scale, who traditionally use coarse metrics such as green-up and seasonal or annual climatic metrics, have turned increasingly to controlled environment experiments and process-based models to understand whether multiple cues underlie trends over time (e.g., {Fu {\i et\~al.}}, 2019). At the same time, researchers building complex molecular pathways that use fine-scale data have started to scale up to make predictions of continent-scale common gardens ({Wilczek {\i et\~al.}}, 2009).\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 These examples provide hope to build from developmental models to predictions in natural conditions, but success will require far greater integration and more openness of the complexities\emdash and failures\emdash of different methods. Most studies of long-term observational phenology data still operate independently from advances in our physiological understanding and from controlled environment studies. Similarly, controlled environment studies generally do not use long-term data to help interpret results or define treatments. For major advances more studies must attempt to use diverse methods and datasets together. Such attempts often highlight problems\emdash large-scale trends in green-up that could be explained by multiple developmental pathways, or process-based models that work at local controlled scales, but fail spectacularly in larger or more natural settings\emdash but without seeing the problems, it will be almost impossible to solve them.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Studies that have integrated results from both controlled environment experiments and with long-term observations provide a path forward ({Caffarra {\i et\~al.}}, 2011; {Satake {\i et\~al.}}, 2013; {Chuine & Regniere}, 2017). Such research underlies progress towards model development that relies continuously on a back-and-forth process between developing models based on both long-term data and experiments, then testing predictions with new experiments and newly-available observational data ({Satake {\i et\~al.}}, 2013). This research has been done only for a handful of crop and model organism species, however, and not extended to natural systems. Our synthesis suggests that {\i Betula pendula} and {\i Fagus sylvatica} are good candidates for expanding to wild forest species across larger landscapes, and represent potentially interesting extremes in leafout timing (early versus late) and photoperiod control of budbreak (weak versus strong).\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\i Building population- and species-rich predictions} \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Given the efforts and data involved in models for a single population or ecotype, building up to multi-population and multi-species predictions may appear daunting, but such models are crucial for accurate forecasts that can apply to diverse regions and large-scale vegetation models. Our current understanding of pathways for phenological events suggest strong population differences ({Wilczek {\i et\~al.}}, 2009; {Tanino {\i et\~al.}}, 2010); while population-level studies of spring budbreak suggest less local adaptation than budset ({Aitken {\i et\~al.}}, 2008), chilling is often strongly differentiated by population ({Junttila & H{\'e4}nninen}, 2012). Thus, models that assume constant cues across a species range could make inaccurate predictions. \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 At the species-level, molecular studies show temperature pathways diverge often across species (in contrast, photoperiodic control appears highly conserved, {Satake {\i et\~al.}}, 2022) suggesting a critical need for more molecular data across species.Long-term data is generally more species-rich than controlled environment studies (see Supporting Information, Methods S1), suggesting more diverse controlled environment studies may be the current major data limitation. Beyond data, however, new modeling approaches can help integrate current and future data more powerfully. \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Bayesian hierarchical models are specifically designed to synthesize across multiple sources of data, attributing variation to the species studied, the levels of each cue, and remaining unmeasured variation in studies (i.e., unreported lab and chamber differences may be captured by including a parameter to estimate a \lquote study\rquote  effect). Such models are extremely powerful for building species-rich predictions, but\emdash like all models\emdash are more robust with more data. With greater efforts to publish data and improved treatment reporting (i.e., all cue conditions defined, even when not manipulated, Fig. {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMfig_heatmaps \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{3}}}) all studies\emdash whether designed to improve models or forecasting, or not\emdash can be included in such models. \par
\pard\plain\s4\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi0 1.6  Right now: It\rquote s your tomorrow\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Research on phenology had been conducted for centuries before anthropogenic climate change caused earlier budburst and leafout across much of the globe ({Lamb}, 1948; {Sparks & Carey}, 1995). Decades of controlled environment studies contributed to our fundamental understanding of the drivers of spring plant phenology. Today, climate change requires leveraging these decades and centuries of research for more accurate predictions that can help humans adapt to warming. \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 We have outlined how researchers could better harness the power of controlled environment experiments to transform our fundamental understanding of phenology and advance forecasting. Controlled environment studies can critically rule out, or support, hypotheses to explain observed discrepancies in long-term data and open up new ways to use long-term data to understand current trends, helping the field move beyond trying to tease out cues using only long-term data where cues are inherently correlated. While understanding, modeling and predicting interactions among cues and their effects on phenology is challenging, it will yield more accurate predictions\emdash with valuable implications to more realistically assess the effects of climate change on plant biodiversity.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\i Acknowledgements:} Comments from A. Austin, R. Guy, L. Rieseberg, and three anonymous reviewers improved this manuscript. NSERC Discovery Award (RGPIN-05038 to EMW), Canada Research Chair in Temporal Ecology (EMW) and Canada Foundation for Innovation (38386 to EMW) provided funding. For IM-C, funding was additionally provided by the Spanish Ministry for Science and Innovation (grant no. PID2019-109711RJ-I00) and Comunidad de Madrid and University of Alcal/\lquote a (funders of I.F.W. through grant no. CM/2021-003).\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\i Author Contributions:} EMW, CJC, DMB, AKE and IM-C prepared the database, conceived of the manuscript, edited it, and contributed to figures and analyses. EMW wrote the manuscript.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \par
\page
\pard\plain\s3\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 2  References\par
{\pard\plain\s61\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb180 \fi0 {\plain\b\fs32 {}}\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \li450\fi0 Aitken SN, Yeaman S, Holliday JA, Wang TL, Curtis-McLane S (2008) Adaptation, migration or extirpation: climate change outcomes for tree populations. {\i Evolutionary Applications}, {\b 1}, 95\endash 111.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Azeez A, Zhao YC, Singh RK, Yordanov YS, Dash M, Miskolczi P, Stojkovic K, Strauss SH, Bhalerao RP, Busov VB (2021) {EARLY BUD-BREAK 1 and EARLY BUD-BREAK 3 control resumption of poplar growth after winter dormancy}. {\i Nature Communications}, {\b 12}, 1123.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Bahuguna RN, Jagadish KS (2015) Temperature regulation of plant phenological development. {\i Environmental and Experimental Botany}, {\b 111}, 83\endash 90.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Basler D, K{\'f6}rner C (2014) Photoperiod and temperature responses of bud swelling and bud burst in four temperate forest tree species. {\i Tree Physiology}, {\b 34}, 377\endash 388.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Bertrand R, Lenoir J, Piedallu C, Riofr{\rquote \u305i}o-Dillon G, de\~Ruffray P, Vidal C, Pierrat JC, G{\rquote e}gout JC (2011) Changes in plant community composition lag behind climate warming in lowland forests. {\i Nature}, {\b 479}, 517.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Caffarra A, Donnelly A, Chuine I (2011) {Modelling the timing of {\i Betula pubescens} budburst. II. Integrating complex effects of photoperiod into process-based models}. {\i Climate Research}, {\b 46}, 159\endash 170.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Chang CYY, Brautigam K, Huner NPA, Ensminger I (2021) Champions of winter survival: cold acclimation and molecular regulation of cold hardiness in evergreen conifers. {\i New Phytologist}, {\b 229}, 675\endash 691.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Chen L, Huang JG, Ma QQ, Hanninen H, Tremblay F, Bergeron Y (2019) Long-term changes in the impacts of global warming on leaf phenology of four temperate tree species. {\i Global Change Biology}, {\b 25}, 997\endash 1004.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Chew YH, Wilczek AM, Williams M, Welch SM, Schmitt J, Halliday KJ (2012) {An augmented Arabidopsis phenology model reveals seasonal temperature control of flowering time}. {\i New Phytologist}, {\b 194}, 654\endash 665.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Chuine I, Bonhomme M, Legave JM, Garc{\'ed}a\~de Cort{\'e1}zar-Atauri I, Charrier G, Lacointe A, Am{\'e9}glio T (2016) Can phenological models predict tree phenology accurately in the future? {T}he unrevealed hurdle of endodormancy break. {\i Global Change Biology}, {\b 22}, 3444\endash 3460.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Chuine I, Regniere J (2017) Process-based models of phenology for plants and animals. {\i Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics}, {\b 48}, 159\endash 182.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Cleland EE, Chuine I, Menzel A, Mooney HA, Schwartz MD (2007) Shifting plant phenology in response to global change. {\i Trends in Ecology & Evolution}, {\b 22}, 357\endash 365.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Delpierre N, Dufrene E, Soudani K, Ulrich E, Cecchini S, Boe J, Francois C (2009) {Modelling interannual and spatial variability of leaf senescence for three deciduous tree species in France}. {\i Agricultural and Forest Meteorology}, {\b 149}, 938\endash 948.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Elith J, Leathwick JR (2009) Species distribution models: ecological explanation and prediction across space and time. {\i Annual review of ecology, evolution, and systematics}, {\b 40}, 677\endash 697.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Ellwood ER, Temple SA, Primack RB, Bradley NL, Davis CC (2013) {Record-breaking early flowering in the Eastern United States}. {\i Plos One}, {\b 8}, e53788.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Elmendorf SC, Ettinger AK (2020) Is photoperiod a dominant driver of secondary growth resumption? {\i Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America}, {\b 117}, 32861\endash 32864.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Ettinger A, Chamberlain C, Morales-Castilla I, Buonaiuto D, Flynn D, Savas T, Samaha J, Wolkovich E (2020) Winter temperatures predominate in spring phenological responses to warming. {\i Nature Climate Change}, {\b 10}, 1137\endash 1142.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Ettinger AK, Buonaiuto DM, Chamberlain CJ, Morales-Castilla I, Wolkovich EM (2021) Spatial and temporal shifts in photoperiod with climate change. {\i New Phytologist}, {\b 230}, 462\endash 474.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Flynn DFB, Wolkovich EM (2018) Temperature and photoperiod drive spring phenology across all species in a temperate forest community. {\i New Phytologist}, {\b 219}, 1353\endash 1362.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Fu YH, Piao S, Zhou X, Geng X, Hao F, Vitasse Y, Janssens IA (2019) {Short photoperiod reduces the temperature sensitivity of leaf-out in saplings of {\i Fagus sylvatica} but not in horse chestnut}. {\i Global Change Biology}, {\b 25}, 1696\endash 1703.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Fu YSH, Zhao HF, Piao SL, Peaucelle M, Peng SS, Zhou GY, Ciais P, Huang MT, Menzel A, Uelas JP, {\i et\~al.} (2015) Declining global warming effects on the phenology of spring leaf unfolding. {\i Nature}, {\b 526}, 104\endash 107.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Gauzere J, Lucas C, Ronce O, Davi H, Chuine I (2019) Sensitivity analysis of tree phenology models reveals increasing sensitivity of their predictions to winter chilling temperature and photoperiod with warming climate. {\i Ecological Modelling}, {\b 441}, 108805.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Gelman A, Hill J, Vehtari A (2020) {\i Regression and Other Stories}. Cambridge University Press, New York.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 G{\'fc}sewell S, Furrer R, Gehrig R, Pietragalla B (2017) {Changes in temperature sensitivity of spring phenology with recent climate warming in Switzerland are related to shifts of the preseason}. {\i Global Change Biology}, {\b 23}, 5189\endash 5202.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Harrington CA, Gould PJ (2015) {Tradeoffs between chilling and forcing in satisfying dormancy requirements for Pacific Northwest tree species}. {\i Frontiers in Plant Science}, {\b 6}, 120.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Heide O (1993) Daylength and thermal time responses of budburst during dormancy release in some northern deciduous trees. {\i Physiologia Plantarum}, {\b 88}, 531\endash 540.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Hereford J, Schmitt J, Ackerly DD (2017) The seasonal climate niche predicts phenology and distribution of an ephemeral annual plant, mollugo verticillata. {\i Journal of Ecology}, {\b 105}, 1323\endash 1334.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Jochner S, Caffarra A, Menzel A (2013) {Can spatial data substitute temporal data in phenological modelling? A survey using birch flowering}. {\i Tree Physiology}, {\b 33}, 1256\endash 1268.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Junttila O, H{\'e4}nninen H (2012) {The minimum temperature for budburst in Betula depends on the state of dormancy}. {\i Tree physiology}, {\b 32}, 337\endash 345.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Lamb RC (1948) {Effect of temperatures above and below freezing on the breaking of rest in the Latham raspberry}. In: {\i Proceedings of the American Society for Horticultural Science}, vol.\~51, pp. 313\endash 315.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Lenoir J, Svenning JC (2015) Climate-related range shifts\endash a global multidimensional synthesis and new research directions. {\i Ecography}, {\b 38}, 15\endash 28.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Luedeling E, Guo L, Dai J, Leslie C, Blanke MM (2013) Differential responses of trees to temperature variation during the chilling and forcing phases. {\i Agricultural and Forest Meteorology}, {\b 181}, 33\endash 42.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Maurya JP, Bhalerao RP (2017) Photoperiod- and temperature-mediated control of growth cessation and dormancy in trees: a molecular perspective. {\i Annals of Botany}, {\b 120}, 351\endash 360.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Menzel A, Sparks TH, Estrella N, Koch E, Aasa A, Ahas R, Alm-Kuebler K, {\i et\~al.} (2006) European phenological response to climate change matches the warming pattern. {\i Global Change Biology}, {\b 12}, 1969\endash 1976.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Partanen J, Koski V, H{\'e4}nninen H (1998) {Effects of photoperiod and temperature on the timing of bud burst in Norway spruce ({\i Picea abies})}. {\i Tree Physiology}, {\b 18}, 811\endash 816.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Piao S, Liu Z, Wang T, Peng S, Ciais P, Huang M, Ahlstrom A, Burkhart JF, Chevallier F, Janssens IA, {\i et\~al.} (2017) Weakening temperature control on the interannual variations of spring carbon uptake across northern lands. {\i Nature climate change}, {\b 7}, 359.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Polgar CA, Primack RB, Dukes JS, Schaaf C, Wang Z, Hoeppner SS (2014) Tree leaf out response to temperature: comparing field observations, remote sensing, and a warming experiment. {\i International journal of biometeorology}, {\b 58}, 1251\endash 1257.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Richardson AD, Hufkens K, Milliman T, Aubrecht DM, Furze ME, Seyednasrollah B, Krassovski MB, Latimer JM, Nettles WR, Heiderman RR, {\i et\~al.} (2018) Ecosystem warming extends vegetation activity but heightens vulnerability to cold temperatures. {\i Nature}, {\b 560}, 368\endash 371.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Richardson E (1974) A model for estimating the completion of rest for {\lquote Redhaven\rquote  and \rquote Elberta\rquote } peach trees. {\i HortScience}, {\b 9}, 331\endash 332.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Rinne PLH, Paul LK, van\~der Schoot C (2018) {Decoupling photo- and thermoperiod by projected climate change perturbs bud development, dormancy establishment and vernalization in the model tree Populus}. {\i BMC Plant Biology}, {\b 18}, 220.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Satake A, Kawagoe T, Saburi Y, Chiba Y, Sakurai G, Kudoh H (2013) Forecasting flowering phenology under climate warming by modelling the regulatory dynamics of flowering-time genes. {\i Nature Communications}, {\b 4}, 2303.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Satake A, Nagahama A, Sasaki E (2022) A cross-scale approach to unravel the molecular basis of plant phenology in temperate and tropical climates. {\i New Phytologist}, {\b 233}, 2340\endash 2353.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Schnabel BJ, Wample RL (1987) {Dormancy and cold hardiness in {\i Vitis vinifera} L. cv. White Riesling as influenced by photoperiod and temperature}. {\i American Journal of Enology and Viticulture}, {\b 38}, 265\endash 272.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Schwartz MD (1997) Spring index models: An approach to connecting satellite and surface phenology. In: {\i Phenology in Seasonal Climates I} (eds. Lieth H, Schwartz MD), pp. 22\endash 38. Backhuys Publisher, Leiden, The Netherlands.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Shen M, Piao S, Dorji T, Liu Q, Cong N, Chen X, An S, Wang S, Wang T, Zhang G (2015) {Plant phenological responses to climate change on the Tibetan Plateau: research status and challenges}. {\i National Science Review}, {\b 2}, 454\endash 467.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Singh RK, Svystun T, AlDahmash B, J{\'f6}nsson AM, Bhalerao RP (2017) Photoperiod-and temperature-mediated control of phenology in trees\endash a molecular perspective. {\i New Phytologist}, {\b 213}, 511\endash 524.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Skuterud R, Dietrichson J (1994) {Budburst in detached birch shoots ({\i Betula pendula}) of different varieties winter-stored in darkness at three different temperatures.} {\i Silva Fennica}, {\b 28}, 223\endash 224.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 S{\'f8}gaard G, Johnsen {\'d8}, Nilsen J, Junttila O (2008) {Climatic control of bud burst in young seedlings of nine provenances of Norway spruce}. {\i Tree Physiology}, {\b 28}, 311\endash 320.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 S{\'f8}nsteby A, Heide OM (2014) {Chilling requirements of contrasting black currant ({\i Ribes nigrum} L.) cultivars and the induction of secondary bud dormancy}. {\i Scientia Horticulturae}, {\b 179}, 256\endash 265.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Sparks TH, Carey PD (1995) {The responses of species to climate over two centuries - an analysis of the Marsham phenological record, 1736-1947}. {\i Journal of Ecology}, {\b 83}, 321\endash 329.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Stearns F, Olson J (1958) {Interactions of photoperiod and temperature affecting seed germination in {\i Tsuga canadensis}}. {\i American Journal of Botany}, {\b 45}, 53\endash 58.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Tanino KK, Kalcsits L, Silim S, Kendall E, Gray GR (2010) Temperature-driven plasticity in growth cessation and dormancy development in deciduous woody plants: a working hypothesis suggesting how molecular and cellular function is affected by temperature during dormancy induction. {\i Plant Molecular Biology}, {\b 73}, 49\endash 65.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Tansey CJ, Hadfield JD, Phillimore AB (2017) Estimating the ability of plants to plastically track temperature-mediated shifts in the spring phenological optimum. {\i Global Change Biology}, {\b 23}, 3321\endash 3334.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Templ B, Koch E, Bolmgren K, Ungersb{\'f6}ck M, Paul A, Scheifinger H, Rutishauser T, Busto M, Chmielewski FM, H{\'e1}jkov{\'e1} L, {\i et\~al.} (2018) {Pan European Phenological database (PEP725): a single point of access for European data}. {\i International Journal of Biometeorology}, {\b 62}, 1109\endash 1113.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Thielges B, Beck R (1976) {Control of bud break and its inheritance in {\i Populus deltoides}}. {\i Tree Physiology and Yield Improvement}, {\b 14}, 253\endash 259.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 van\~der Schoot C, Paul LK, Rinne PLH (2014) The embryonic shoot: a lifeline through winter. {\i Journal of Experimental Botany}, {\b 65}, 1699\endash 1712.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Visser ME, Holleman LJ (2001) Warmer springs disrupt the synchrony of oak and winter moth phenology. {\i Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences}, {\b 268}, 289\endash 294.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Wilczek AM, Roe JL, Knapp MC, Cooper MD, Lopez-Gallego C, Martin LJ, Muir CD, Sim S, Walker A, Anderson J, {\i et\~al.} (2009) Effects of genetic perturbation on seasonal life history plasticity. {\i Science}, {\b 323}, 930\endash 934.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Wolkovich EM, Cook BI, Allen JM, Crimmins TM, Betancourt JL, Travers SE, Pau S, Regetz J, Davies TJ, Kraft NJB, {\i et\~al.} (2012) Warming experiments underpredict plant phenological responses to climate change. {\i Nature}, {\b 485}, 494\endash 497.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Worrall J, Mergen F (1967) {Environmental and genetic control of dormancy in {\i Picea abies}}. {\i Physiologia Plantarum}, {\b 20}, 733\endash 745.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Yu HY, Luedeling E, Xu JC (2010) {Winter and spring warming result in delayed spring phenology on the Tibetan Plateau}. {\i Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America}, {\b 107}, 22151\endash 22156.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Zohner CM, Benito BM, Svenning JC, Renner SS (2016) Day length unlikely to constrain climate-driven shifts in leaf-out times of northern woody plants. {\i Nature Climate Change}, {\b 6}, 1120\endash 1123.\par
\pard\plain\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20\sl240\slmult1 \li450\fi0 Zohner CM, Renner SS (2014) Common garden comparison of the leaf-out phenology of woody species from different native climates, combined with herbarium records, forecasts long-term change. {\i Ecology Letters}, {\b 17}, 1016\endash 1025.\par
}\page
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Methods S1: Overview of OSPREE database\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Methods S2: Comparing experimental treatments to forecasted trends\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Notes S1: The chilling enigma of over-winter temperatures\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Notes S2: Trends in experimental treatments over cue levels and space\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Table S1: Dataset names and references for papers in the OSPREE database.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Figs S1: Map of locations of studies reviewed.\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Figs S2: Utah Chill model and warming temperatures\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Figs S3: Number of cues manipulated in studies over time\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Figs S4: How experimental treatments correlate with latitude \par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {\i Data Availability:} Data from a systematic literature review included in the paper is freely available at KNB (doi:10.5063/F1CZ35KB at knb.ecoinformatics.org).\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \par
\pard\plain\s3\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 3  Figures\par
{\page
\pard\plain\s31\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \sb300 \fi0 \par
\pard\plain\s30\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {Figure {\*\bkmkstart BMfig_intxncues}1{\*\bkmkend BMfig_intxncues}: {\i0\scaps0\b Nonlinear phenological responses to warming can occur when multiple cues shift in concert with climate change.} Much research focuses on how warming increases forcing, but warming may also alter other cues, including photoperiod experienced near the time of the event (yellow line), which is expected to shorten, and chilling (blue lines), which may either increase or decrease (a). Shifts in forcing alongside shifts in a second cue may produce non-linearities due to the interaction between cues (b-c) showing the effect of: forcing-only (dashed line), both cues without an interaction (\lquote noint\rquote ), and both cues with an interaction (labeled as \lquote weak\rquote  and \lquote strong\rquote ). The overall change in budburst day predicted with warming depends on the sign of the second cue (negative in b, positive in c), as well as its strength (weak/strong).}{\field{\*\fldinst TC "1 {\i0\scaps0\b Nonlinear phenological responses to warming can occur when multiple cues shift in concert with climate change.} Much research focuses on how warming increases forcing, but warming may also alter other cues, including photoperiod experienced near the time of the event (yellow line), which is expected to shorten, and chilling (blue lines), which may either increase or decrease (a). Shifts in forcing alongside shifts in a second cue may produce non-linearities due to the interaction between cues (b-c) showing the effect of: forcing-only (dashed line), both cues without an interaction (\lquote noint\rquote ), and both cues with an interaction (labeled as \lquote weak\rquote  and \lquote strong\rquote ). The overall change in budburst day predicted with warming depends on the sign of the second cue (negative in b, positive in c), as well as its strength (weak/strong)." \\f f}{\fldrslt }}\par
}{\pard\plain\s31\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \sb480 \fi0 \par
\pard\plain\s30\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {Figure {\*\bkmkstart BMfig_gddbyutah}2{\*\bkmkend BMfig_gddbyutah}: {\i0\scaps0\b A common example of how the level of one cue can modify the required level of another cue} comes from experiments finding that the amount of chilling affects the amount of forcing needed for budburst. Here, we show this from experiments in (a) black currant ({\i Ribes nigrum}) from {S{\'f8}nsteby & Heide} (2014) and (b) eastern cottonwood ({\i Populus deltoides}) from {Thielges & Beck} (1976). Forcing is estimated as growing degree days (GDD, sum of temperatures {>0\'b0}C) while chilling is estimated using the Utah Model (see {Richardson}, 1974).}{\field{\*\fldinst TC "2 {\i0\scaps0\b A common example of how the level of one cue can modify the required level of another cue} comes from experiments finding that the amount of chilling affects the amount of forcing needed for budburst. Here, we show this from experiments in (a) black currant ({\i Ribes nigrum}) from {S{\'f8}nsteby & Heide} (2014) and (b) eastern cottonwood ({\i Populus deltoides}) from {Thielges & Beck} (1976). Forcing is estimated as growing degree days (GDD, sum of temperatures {>0\'b0}C) while chilling is estimated using the Utah Model (see {Richardson}, 1974)." \\f f}{\fldrslt }}\par
}{\pard\plain\s31\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \sb480 \fi0  \par
\pard\plain\s30\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {Figure {\*\bkmkstart BMfig_heatmaps}3{\*\bkmkend BMfig_heatmaps}: {\i0\scaps0\b Studies have examined a range of cue-space} (forcing temperature x photoperiod across two methods to manipulate chilling: a) experimentally or b) using multiple field sampling dates), but a focus on certain levels of cues and limited reporting of all cues makes using these data to estimate non-linearities challenging (see \lquote Forecasting non-linear responses: Do we have the necessary data?\rquote ). Gray squares indicate a combination of forcing x photoperiod not present for that method of chilling design (includes studies that did not clearly report chilling treatments), while a value of \lquote NA\rquote  indicates that we could not estimate a level of a particular cue because it was not clearly reported. Photoperiod treatments were generally only applied (or reported) during forcing conditions.}{\field{\*\fldinst TC "3 {\i0\scaps0\b Studies have examined a range of cue-space} (forcing temperature x photoperiod across two methods to manipulate chilling: a) experimentally or b) using multiple field sampling dates), but a focus on certain levels of cues and limited reporting of all cues makes using these data to estimate non-linearities challenging (see \lquote Forecasting non-linear responses: Do we have the necessary data?\rquote ). Gray squares indicate a combination of forcing x photoperiod not present for that method of chilling design (includes studies that did not clearly report chilling treatments), while a value of \lquote NA\rquote  indicates that we could not estimate a level of a particular cue because it was not clearly reported. Photoperiod treatments were generally only applied (or reported) during forcing conditions." \\f f}{\fldrslt }}\par
}{\pard\plain\s31\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs22\sl240\slmult1 \sb480 \fi0  \par
\pard\plain\s30\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 {Figure {\*\bkmkstart BMfig_pep}4{\*\bkmkend BMfig_pep}: {\i0\scaps0\b Findings from controlled environment experiments are relevant for forecasting applications} based on comparison of two well-studied species: {\i Fagus sylvatica} (a-b) and {\i Betula pendula}. Points represent a site with spring phenology data (from the PEP725 database, {Templ {\i et\~al.}}, 2018) and show the predicted change (2080s average - 1970s average) in minimum (a,c) and maximum (b,d) temperatures 60 days before leafout. We found that treatment differences (see lines in inlay plots, green lines show the treatments for that exact species, while black lines show across all species in the OSPREE database) generally bracketed predicted changes (histograms in inlay plots show the same predicted changes in temperature represented also by the mapped points), but were on average much larger in magnitude. We show chilling (a,c) and forcing (b,d) differences in treatments across studies (for {\i Fagus sylvatica} there are no chilling treatments of differing temperatures, so green line is absent in inset of a). For more details, see Methods S2 in the Supporting Information.}{\field{\*\fldinst TC "4 {\i0\scaps0\b Findings from controlled environment experiments are relevant for forecasting applications} based on comparison of two well-studied species: {\i Fagus sylvatica} (a-b) and {\i Betula pendula}. Points represent a site with spring phenology data (from the PEP725 database, {Templ {\i et\~al.}}, 2018) and show the predicted change (2080s average - 1970s average) in minimum (a,c) and maximum (b,d) temperatures 60 days before leafout. We found that treatment differences (see lines in inlay plots, green lines show the treatments for that exact species, while black lines show across all species in the OSPREE database) generally bracketed predicted changes (histograms in inlay plots show the same predicted changes in temperature represented also by the mapped points), but were on average much larger in magnitude. We show chilling (a,c) and forcing (b,d) differences in treatments across studies (for {\i Fagus sylvatica} there are no chilling treatments of differing temperatures, so green line is absent in inset of a). For more details, see Methods S2 in the Supporting Information." \\f f}{\fldrslt }}\par
}}}
